
10 AM, SLC on a Sunday. 

Exams start next week; this is the calm before the storm. 

I sit alone at this table at the corner of the second floor. In fact, I, alone, am studying on the entire second floor.

I’m in my fifth study term of undergrad which corresponds to 3A, although uWaterloo officially recognizes me as 3B because of the extra courses I’ve taken.

I took two courses at Waterloo -- Combinatorics (MATH239) and Operating Systems (CS350) -- and three courses at Laurier -- Marketing (BU352), Human Resources (BU354), and Finance II (BU393). 

I joined Laurier Consulting Club as a consultant as a part of their Consulting Program and somehow ended up being given the lead role. 

I also worked a part-time internship at National Logistics Services where I got the opportunity to learn SO much and make a side income to feed my lazeez addiction.

Normally, I’d reflect on each course and talk about the ups and downs. This term was mostly downs for every course. A depression-fueled lack of motivation coupled with a general distaste for the courses I was taking resulted in terrible grades, poor attendance, and lethargy.

I reached rock bottom around a week ago (so the end of November) and it really hit me that I’d fallen so far from where I used to be; I’d skipped so much class, avoided so many friends, and missed so any commitments.

In Grade 12, I was highly motivated and disciplined -- every mark meant acceptance or rejection to the school and program of my dreams and this motivation actually increased my quality of life to the point where I had the most friendships ever before and happiness at a level I’d not been accustomed to. 

Now, in my first term of third year, I’m lazy, unmotivated, alone. It sounds sad and yet it’s largely true. But it doesn’t make me nearly as sad as it should because I know, for a fact, I can go back to my peaks. 

I’ve started praying five times a day consistently and when I miss the morning prayer, I make sure that I pray the make up prayer first thing in the morning. It’s the easiest thing I could have done and it’s already doing wonders for my mentality.

I NEED to sleep early. I need to use a calendar to plan my time from the start. I need to make time for friends and family. Sleeping late put me in this vicious cycle where I woke up for class, did the bare minimum work afterwards, and when I got home I’d be too tired to talk to my parents or make plans with friends. I’ve had the terrible habit of laying in bed on my phone until almost 2am doing nothing but refreshing reddit and I need to kick it.

A long time ago, when I asked one of my best friends how he wakes up so early everyday, he gave me a great answer: “I just _get_ out of bed”.

And it’s true. I wake up at 7am every day and I haven’t quite reached my activation energy to get out of bed, but if I just tell myself to get up, that’s all the catalyst I need to just do it. 

Discipline is key -- and I haven’t had it since Grade 12. When every mark meant acceptance or rejection into a highly competitive program, I was motivated and sharp. But now? 

“Marks don’t matter”

It’s true in a sense, but I think I’ve been focusing on the wrong outcomes. I’m not trying to be disciplined to get good grades, I’m doing it to have a good lifestyle. I became lazy and unmotivated throughout this term and everyone noticed and next term needs to be different when the craziness of co-op interviews hits.

I’m bad with relationships -- I always have been and that’s no excuse. When I lived with my parents, I would get home, say a few words and run upstairs to the comfort of my room.

“I’m an introvert” I thought to myself.

“I need time to myself to recharge”

Yeah, except calling myself an introvert isn’t an excuse at all; life isn’t so binary. When I get in my zone, I’m the most outwardly sociable, annoying person in the world. This term (and honestly for a long time), I’ve been in this terrible mindset where I’m a “lone wolf” and I do things my own way. I don’t send snaps to my best friends because “snapchat is waste”; I don’t make plans to go to the movies or anything else because “I’m focusing on school”; I don’t talk to my family because “it’s awkward”. When someone leaves me a missed call, I push it to the back of my mind. It needs to change.

And it will.

It’s the week before exams and I’ve still got a lot to do to bring my marks back up and my lifestyle back to form. A lot of studying, a lot of work, a lot of reparations will follow this reflection.

This is the calm before the storm.

*Post-exam update*:

February 3rd, 2019.

I'm updating well after exams have ended since I think I have a better perspective on it with the dust settled.

I did pretty well all things considered. I went into MATH239 with a failing grade and came out with a high 60s final mark. CS350 dropped but not nearly as much as I expected. Marketing went far better than the midterm. HR, unforunately, was a casualty of being the same day as the CS350 final. Finance, too, was neither here nor there. 

This term, I ended up dropping French in order to focus on myself a bit more and allow for co-op. I really want a co-op in the States -- to the point that I may have applied a bit too much in the USA on WaterlooWorks for my own good. I've also signed up for Muay Thai, Swimming, Yoga, and calisthenics classes. We will see where I find myself in regards to these ventures at the end of the term. 